Connector builder: Authentication documentation (#25112)
airbytehq/airbyte: docs/connector-development/connector-builder-ui/authentication.md

# Authentication

> Authentication allows the connection to check whether it has sufficient permission to fetch data. The authentication feature provides a secure way to configure authentication using a variety of methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Authentication allows the connector to check whether it has sufficient permission to fetch data. The authentication feature provides a secure way to configure authentication using a variety of methods.
```

If your API doesn't need authentication, leave it set at "No auth". This means the connector will be able to make requests to the API without providing any credentials which might be the case for some public open APIs or private APIs only available in local networks.

## Authentication methods

Check the documentation of the API you want to integrate for the used authentication method. The following ones are supported in the connector builder:
* [Basic HTTP](#basic-http)
* [Bearer Token](#bearer-token)
* [API Key](#api-key)
* [OAuth](#oauth)

Select the matching authentication method for your API and check the sections below for more information about individual methods.

### Basic HTTP

If requests are authenticated using the Basic HTTP authentication method, the documentation page will likely contain one of the following keywords:
- "Basic Auth"
- "Basic HTTP"
- "Authorization: Basic"
- "Base64"

The Basic HTTP authentication method is a standard and doesn't require any further configuration. Username and password are set via "Testing values" in the connector builder and by the end user when configuring this connector as a Source.

#### Example

> The [Greenhouse API](https://developers.greenhouse.io/harvest.html#introduction) is an API using basic authentication.

Reviewer 2: Nit, we can actually link directly to the `authentication` section in the URL instead of `introduction`:
https://developers.greenhouse.io/harvest.html#authentication

Sometimes, only a username and no password is required, like for the [Chargebee API](https://apidocs.chargebee.com/docs/api/auth?prod_cat_ver=2) - in these cases simply leave the password input empty.

In the basic authentication scheme, the supplied username and password are concatenated with a colon `:` and encoded using the base64 algorithm. For username `user` and password `passwd`, the base64-encoding of `user:passwd` is `dXNlcjpwYXNzd2Q=`.

When fetching records, this string is sent as part of the `Authorization` header:
```
curl -X GET \
  -H "Authorization: Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd2Q=" \
  https://harvest.greenhouse.io/v1/<stream path>
```

### Bearer Token

If requests are authenticated using Bearer authentication, the documentation will probably mention "bearer token" or "token authentication". In this scheme, the `Authorization` header of the HTTP request is set to `Bearer <token>`.

> Like the Basic HTTP authentication it does not require further configuration. The bearer token can be set via "Testing values" in the connector builder as well as paert of the source configuration when configuring connections.

Author: Sounds good to me, did you capitalize "Source" on purpose?

> Like the Basic HTTP authentication it does not require further configuration. The bearer token can be set via "Testing values" in the connector builder as well as paert of the source configuration when configuring connections.

Reviewer: I did, since I believe that is the terminology we use elsewhere. Probably not a huge deal if it is capitalized or not though

  https://api.sendgrid.com/<stream path>
```

### API Key

The API key authentication method is similar to the Bearer authentication but allows to configure as which HTTP header the API key is sent as part of the request. The http header name is part of the connector definition while the API key itself can be set via "Testing values" in the connector builder as well as when configuring this connector as a Source.

This form of authentication is often called "(custom) header authentication". It only supports setting the token to an HTTP header, for other cases, see the ["Other authentication methods" section](#access-token-as-query-or-body-parameter)

#### Example

The [CoinAPI.io API](https://docs.coinapi.io/market-data/rest-api#authorization) is using API key authentication via the `X-CoinAPI-Key` header.

When fetching records, the api token is included in the request using the configured header:
```
curl -X GET \
  -H "X-CoinAPI-Key: <api-key>" \
  https://rest.coinapi.io/v1/<stream path>
```

### OAuth

The OAuth authentication method implements authentication using an [OAuth2.0 flow with a refresh token grant type](https://oauth.net/2/grant-types/refresh-token/).

> In this scheme the OAuth endpoint of an API is called with a long-lived refresh token that's provided by the end user when configuring this connector as a Source. The refresh token is used to obtain a short-lived access token that's used to make requests actually extracting records. If the access token expires, the connection will automatically request a new one.

Reviewer 2: comma nit

```suggestion
In this scheme, the OAuth endpoint of an API is called with a long-lived refresh token that's provided by the end user when configuring this connector as a source. The refresh token is used to obtain a short-lived access token that's used to make requests actually extracting records. If the access token expires, the connection will automatically request a new one.
```

* Scopes - if not specified, no scopes are sent along with the refresh token request
* Grant type - if not specified, it's set to `refresh_token`
* Token expiry property name - if not specified, it's set to `expires_in`
* Token expire property date format - if not specified, the expiry property is interpreted as the number of seconds the access token will be valid
* Access token property name - the name of the property in the response that contains the access token to do requests. If not specified, it's set to `access_token`

If the API uses a short-lived refresh token that expires after a short amount of time and needs to be refreshed as well or if other grant types like PKCE are required, it's not possible to use the connector builder with OAuth authentication - check out the [compatibility guide](/connector-development/config-based/connector-builder-compatibility#oauth) for more information.

> Keep in mind that the OAuth authentication method does not implement a single-click authentication experience for the end user configuring the connector - it will still be necessary to obtain client id, client secret and refresh token from the API and manually enter them into the configuration form.

Reviewer: Would it make sense here to explain why this isn't supported? E.g. something along the lines of "Single-click authentication is only supported in Airbyte Cloud. For more information on Airbyte Cloud, click here [link]. To get your connector added to the Airbyte Cloud connector catalog, see here [link]"
(not sure if we have those other pages to link to at the moment)

This would help advertise Airbyte Cloud and explain a bit why it isn't in OSS. But if we don't want this to be any sort of advertisement for Airbyte cloud (which may make sense in concept docs like these), then I would be fine with leaving this out too

Reviewer 3: Single click authentication won't be available on airbyte cloud for custom connectors because we need to implement a custom oauth flow for each new connector

# Authentication

> Authentication is about providing some form of confidental secret (credentials, password, token, key) to the API provider that identifies the caller (in this case the connector). It allows the provider to check whether the caller is known and has sufficient permission to fetch data. The authentication feature provides a secure way to configure authentication using a variety of methods.

Reviewer 2: I think we can get rid of "whether the caller is known". We get the point across just saying:
"It allows the connection to check if it has sufficient permission to fetch data."

The credentials itself (e.g. username and password) are _not_ specified as part of the connector, instead they are part of the source configration that is specified by the end user when setting up a source based on the connector. During development, it's possible to provide testing credentials in the "Testing values" menu, but those are not saved along with the connector. Credentials that are part of the source configuration are stored in a secure way in your Airbyte instance while the connector configuration is saved in the regular database.

> In the "Authentication" section on the "Global Configuration" page in the connector builder, the authentication method can be specified. This configuration is shared for all streams - it's not possible to use different authentication methods for different streams in the same connector.

Reviewer 3: we should recommend they use low-code or Python CDK if they need different authentication methods

> If your API doesn't need authentication, leave it set at "No auth". This means the connector will be able to make requests to the API without providing any credentials which might be the case for some public open APIs or private APIs only available in local networks.

Reviewer 2: just noting we'll have to reword this when we make the swap to use the checkbox. If we decide to update the docs along with that change, we should add changing this paragraph in the acceptance criteria.

## Authentication methods

Check the documentation of the API you want to integrate for the used authentication method. The following ones are supported in the connector builder:
* [Basic HTTP](#basic-http)

> * [Bearer](#bearer)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Bearer Token](#bearer-token)
```

* [API Key](#api-key)
* [OAuth](#oauth)
* [Session token](#session-token)

Select the matching authentication method for your API and check the sections below for more information about individual methods.

### Basic HTTP

If requests are authenticated using the Basic HTTP authentication method, the documentation page will likely contain one of the following keywords:
- "Basic Auth"
- "Basic HTTP"
- "Authorization: Basic"
- "Base64"

The Basic HTTP authentication method is a standard and doesn't require any further configuration. Username and password are set via "Testing values" in the connector builder and as part of the source configuration when configuring connections.

#### Example

> The [Greenhouse API](https://developers.greenhouse.io/harvest.html#introduction) is an API using basic auth.

Reviewer 2: nit: for doc purposes we shouldn't abbreviate:
```
is an API using basic authentication.
```

Sometimes, only a username and no password is required, like for the [Chargebee API](https://apidocs.chargebee.com/docs/api/auth?prod_cat_ver=2) - in these cases simply leave the password input empty.

> In the basic auth scheme, the supplied username and password are concatenated with a colon `:` and encoded using the base64 algorithm. For username `user` and password `passwd`, the base64-encoding of `user:passwd` is `dXNlcjpwYXNzd2Q=`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the basic authentication scheme, the supplied username and password are concatenated with a colon `:` and encoded using the base64 algorithm. For username `user` and password `passwd`, the base64-encoding of `user:passwd` is `dXNlcjpwYXNzd2Q=`.
```

When fetching records, this string is sent as part of the `Authorization` header:
```
curl -X GET \
  -H "Authorization: Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd2Q=" \
  https://harvest.greenhouse.io/v1/<stream path>
```

> ### Bearer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Bearer Token
```

If requests are authenticated using Bearer authentication, the documentation will probably mention "bearer token" or "token authentication". In this scheme, the `Authorization` header of the HTTP request is set to `Bearer <token>`.

Like the Basic HTTP authentication it does not require further configuration. The bearer token can be set via "Testing values" in the connector builder as well as paert of the source configuration when configuring connections.

#### Example

The [Sendgrid API](https://docs.sendgrid.com/api-reference/how-to-use-the-sendgrid-v3-api/authentication) and the [Square API](https://developer.squareup.com/docs/build-basics/access-tokens) are supporting Bearer authentication.

> When fetching records, the token is sent along as the `Authorization` header:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When fetching records, the token is included in the request using the `Authorization` header:
```

```
curl -X GET \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <bearer token>" \
  https://api.sendgrid.com/<stream path>
```

### API Key

> The API key authentication method is similar to the Bearer authentication but allows to configure as which HTTP header the API key is sent as part of the request. The http header name is part of the connector definition while the API key itself can be set via "Testing values" in the connector builder as well as part of the source configuration when configuring connections.

Author: Not sure whether we can get this in before the first release, I will add a "custom" section to the documentation explaining this approach

> The API key authentication method is similar to the Bearer authentication but allows to configure as which HTTP header the API key is sent as part of the request. The http header name is part of the connector definition while the API key itself can be set via "Testing values" in the connector builder as well as part of the source configuration when configuring connections.

Reviewer 3: nit: let's link to the `#### Access token as query or body parameter` section since looking at the API key section first is a good instinct

This form of authentication is often called "(custom) header authentication".

#### Example

The [CoinAPI.io API](https://docs.coinapi.io/market-data/rest-api#authorization) is using API key authentication via the `X-CoinAPI-Key` header.

When fetching records, the api token is sent along as the configured header:
```
curl -X GET \
  -H "X-CoinAPI-Key: <api-key>" \
  https://rest.coinapi.io/v1/<stream path>
```

### OAuth

> The OAuth authentication method implements authentication using an OAuth2.0 flow with a refresh token grant type.

Reviewer 2: Given that Oauth is a standardization, I think linking out to external docs that go into more detail is not a bad idea

> In this scheme the OAuth endpoint of an API is called with a long-lived refresh token provided as part of the source configuration to obtain a short-lived access token that's used to make requests actually extracting records. If the access token expires, a new one is requested automatically.

Reviewer 2: "If the access token expires, the connection will automatically request a new one."

> It needs to be configured with the endpoint to call to obtain access tokens with the refresh token. OAuth client id/secret and the refresh token are provided via "Testing values" in the connector builder as well as part of the source configuration when configuring connections.

Reviewer 2: nit: I think we should try to avoid using `it` whenever possible because it can be ambiguous what it means.

`The connector needs to be configured with an endpoint to obtain access tokens with the refresh token.`

Depending on how the refresh endpoint is implemented exactly, additional configuration might be necessary to specify how to request an access token with the right permissions (configuring OAuth scopes and grant type) and how to extract the access token and the expiry date out of the response (configuring expiry date format and property name as well as the access key property name):
* Scopes - if not specified, no scopes are sent along with the refresh token request
* Grant type - if not specified, it's set to `refresh_token`
* Token expiry property name - if not specified, it's set to `expires_in`
* Token expire property date format - if not specified, the expiry property is interpreted as the number of seconds the access token will be valid
* Access token property name - the name of the property in the response that contains the access token to do requests. If not specified, it's set to `access_token`

> If the refresh token itself isn't long lived but expires after a short amount of time and needs to be refresh as well or if other grant types like PKCE are required, it's not possible to use the connector builder with OAuth authentication - check out the [compatibility guide](http://localhost:3000/connector-development/config-based/connector-builder-compatibility#oauth) for more information.

Reviewer 2: the reads a little redundantly and grammar nits:
```
If the API uses a short-lived refresh token that expires after a short amount of time and needs to be refreshed as well or if other grant types like PKCE are required
```

> Keep in mind that the OAuth authentication method does not implement a single-click authentication experience for the end user configuring the connector - it will still be necessary to obtain client id, client secret and refresh token from the API and manually enter them into the configuration form.

Reviewer 3: good callout

In this case, the authentication method has to be configured like this:
* "Token refresh endpoint" is `https://connect.squareup.com/oauth2/token`
* "Token expiry property name" is `expires_at`

When running a sync, the connector is first sending client id, client secret and refresh token to the token refresh endpoint:
```

curl -X POST \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"client_id": "<client id>", "client_secret": "<client secret>", "refresh_token": "<refresh token>", "grant_type": "refresh_token" }' \
  <token refresh endpoint>
```

The response is a JSON object containing an `access_token` property and an `expires_at` property:
```
 {"access_token":"<access-token>", "expires_at": "2023-12-12T00:00:00"}
```

The `expires_at` date tells the connector how long the access token can be used - if this point in time is passed, a new access token is requested automatically.

When fetching records, the access token is sent along as part of the `Authorization` header:
```
curl -X GET \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <access-token>" \
  https://connect.squareup.com/v2/<stream path>
```

> ### Session token

Reviewer 2: Sounds like we're getting rid of this?

The session token authentication method is the right choice if the API requires a consumer to send a request to "log in", returning a session token which can be used to send request actually extracting records.

Username and password are supplied as "Testing values" / as part of the source configuration and are sent to the configured "Login url" as a JSON body with a `username` and a `password` property. The "Session token response key" specifies where to find the session token in the log-in response. The "Header" specifies in which HTTP header field the session token has to be injected.

Besides specifying username and password, the session token authentication method also allows 

to directly specify the session token via the source configuration. In this case, the "Validate session url" is used to check whether the provided session token is still valid.

> #### Example

Reviewer 3: we should remove or replace the metabase API if we don't include the session token authenticator

In this case, the authentication method has to be configured like this:
* "Login url" is `session`
* "Session token response key" is `id`
* "Header" is `X-Metabase-Session`
* "Validate session url" is `user/current`

When running a sync, the connector is first sending username and password to the `session` 
endpoint:
```
curl -X POST \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"username": "<username>", "password": "<password>"}' \
  http://<base url>/session
```

The response is a JSON object containing an `id` property:
```
 {"id":"<session-token>"}
```

When fetching records, the session token is sent along as the `X-Metabase-Session` header:
```
curl -X GET \
  -H "X-Metabase-Session: <session-token>" \
  http://<base url>/<stream path>
```

If the session token is specified as part of the source configuration, the "Validate session url" is requested with the existing token to check for validity:
```
curl -X GET \
  -H "X-Metabase-Session: <session-token>" \
  http://<base url>/user/current
```

If this request returns an HTTP status code that's not in the range of 400 to 600, the token is considered valid and records are fetched.

## Reference

> For detailed documentation of the underlying low code components, see here TODO

Reviewer 3: commenting so we don't forget about this TODO

Reviewer: This TODO is still here FYI
